**Updated on:** Jul 14, 2019

**DOI:** 10.21428/7e0583ad

To every age, a relic: a loom, an automobile, the PC, a 3D
printer. L’Encyclopédie<span class="footnote" node-type="footnote"
value="Developing Musical Intuitions: A Project-Based Introduction to Making and Understanding Music."
date-structured-value="" count="1">1</span> was its period’s signpost,
cataloguing and concretizing the boundaries between the disciplines,
which emerged from the “long eighteenth century” of the Enlightenment.
For the next quarter of a millennium, we remained indoctrinated to the
shibboleths of this relic, operating within discrete silos-of-thought.
At the dawn of the new millennium, the meme “antidisciplinary” appeared,
yanking us out of Aristotle’s shadow and into a new ‘Age of
Entanglement.’ <span class="footnote" node-type="footnote"
value="The Age of Digital Entanglement. Scientific American. 303, 93."
date-structured-value="" count="2">2</span><sup>,</sup> <span
class="footnote" node-type="footnote"
value="The Age of Digital Entanglement. Scientific American. 303, 93."
date-structured-value="" count="3">3</span>

This essay proposes a map for four domains of creative
exploration—Science, Engineering, Design and Art—in an attempt to
represent the antidisciplinary hypothesis: that knowledge can no longer
be ascribed to, or produced within, disciplinary boundaries, but is
entirely entangled. The goal is to establish a tentative, yet holistic,
cartography of the interrelation between these domains, where one realm
can incite (r)evolution inside another; and where a single individual or
project can reside in multiple dominions. Mostly, this is an invitation
to question and to amend what is being proposed.

Maeda finds Gold
================

All roads lead to the “Bermuda Quadrilateral.”<span class="footnote"
node-type="footnote"
value="The Art Instinct: Beauty, Pleasure, and Human Evolution."
date-structured-value="" count="4">4</span> In 2007, John Maeda proposed
a diagram under this name, based on the “Rich Gold matrix.” The map—a
rectangular plot—was parceled into four quadrants, each devoted to a
unique view by which to read, and act upon, the world: Science,
Engineering, Design and Art. According to Maeda, to each plot a
designated mission: to Science, exploration; to Engineering, invention;
to Design, communication; to Art, expression. Describing the four “hats”
of creativity, Rich Gold had originally drawn the matrix-as-cartoon to
communicate four discrete embodiments of creativity and innovation. Mark
your mindset, conquer its little acre, and settle in. Gold’s view
represents four ways-of-being that are distinctly different from one
another, separated by clear intellectual boundaries and mental
dispositions. Like the Four Humors, each is regarded as its own
substance, to each its content and its countenance. Stated differently,
if you’re a citizen in one, you’re a tourist in another.

But how can we become constant travelers within a border-free, and
lingo-legible ‘intellectual Pangea?' How can we traverse a cerebral
supercontinent, where the analog of world citizenship governs our
identity as thinking—and creating—beings? How can we navigate an atlas
that is charted not for four hats, but for one pair of shoes, and with
which we can—including some luck and a quantum leap-of-faith—inhabit
multiple places at once? Can a scientist invent better solutions than an
engineer? Is an artist’s mindset really all that different from a
scientist’s? Are they simply two ways of operating in the world that are
complementary and intertwined? Or, when practicing art, is perhaps what
truly counts less the art form and more one’s (way of) being?
Ultimately: is there a way to understand the culture of making which
transcends a two-dimensional Euclidean geometry—four plots to match four
hats—to a more holistic, integrative and globe-like approach?

Caving
======

In his recent film, Particle Fever (2014), Mark Levinson documents the
first round of experiments at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC),
investigating the origins of matter. The film opens with the initial
firings of the LHC, designed to recreate the conditions associated with
the Big Bang. It closes with prehistoric cave paintings, and an
intriguing assertion by Savas Dimopoulos on the connection between Art
and Science: “The things that are least important for our survival are
the very things that make us human.” Both Art and Science can be
understood as human needs to express the world around us. Both require
suspension of disbelief, offering speculations about our physical and
immaterial reality prior to proof. And both—as has been the case since
the painting of the Chauvet Cave some 40,000 years ago—have no rules and
no boundaries. The artists who produced these paintings did so in order
to first face, then make sense of, their reality. We do Science with
precisely the same motivation. Similarly nebulous are the boundaries
between Design and both Art and Engineering. Design, in its critical
embodiment (Critical Design), operates through speculation, devising
unforeseen strategies that challenge preconceived assumptions about how
we use, and live within, the built environment. In its affirmative
embodiment (Affirmative Design), Design operates by offering practical,
and often utilitarian, solutions that can be rapidly deployed. The
former carries the mentality of Art, while the borders between the
latter and Engineering are at best difficult to parse. Similar vagaries
exist, too, between Science/Design, Engineering/Art, and
Science/Engineering. It is likely to assume that if what you are
designing carries meaning and relevance, you are not operating within a
single, distinct domain.

How can we re-occupy the four corners of the “Bermuda Quadrilateral” as
transitory embodiments of creativity and innovation? Better yet, how can
we travel them, or even co-exist within them, in a way that is at once
meaningful and productive? Can operating within one domain generate a
kind of ‘creative energy’ that enables the easy transition to another?

Creative Energy (CreATP)
========================

The Krebs Cycle is a metabolic pathway made up of chemical reactions.
One of the earliest established components of cellular metabolism, all
breathing organisms could not exist without it. Its outcome, through the
oxidation of nutrients, is the production of chemical energy, carried
throughout the cell in the form of Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP). ATP can
therefore be considered a molecular unit of currency for energy
transfer. The Krebs Cycle is akin to a metabolic clock that first
generates, then consumes, then regenerates currency in the form of ATP
over time. Crudely expressed: good metabolism will make you constantly
rich. By the same token, can intellectual digestion—the kind that
demands you shift views and perspectives—make you constantly
intellectually rich?

The Krebs Cycle of Creativity (KCC) is a map that describes the
perpetuation of creative energy (creative ATP or ‘CreATP’), analogous to
the Krebs Cycle proper. In this analogy, the four modalities of human
creativity—Science, Engineering, Design and Art—replace the Krebs
Cycle’s carbon compounds. Each of the modalities (or ‘compounds‘)
produces ‘currency’ by transforming into another:

![](https://assets.pubpub.org/93uq1idg/21508273276775.png)

The role of Science is to explain and predict the world around us; it
‘converts’ information into knowledge. The role of Engineering is to
apply scientific knowledge to the development of solutions for empirical
problems; it ‘converts’ knowledge into utility. The role of Design is to
produce embodiments of solutions that maximize function and augment
human experience; it ‘converts’ utility into behavior. The role
of Art is to question human behavior and create awareness of the world
around us; it ‘converts’ behavior into new perceptions of information,
re-presenting the data that initiated the KCC in Science. At this
‘Cinderella moment’—when the hands of the KCC strike midnight—new
perception inspires new scientific exploration. For example, in As Slow
as Possible, John Cage transports the listener into a state where space
and time are stretched, offering a personal interpretation of time
dilation and questioning the nature of space-time itself.

The KCC is designed as a circle with the four modalities of creativity
preserved in their original location from the “Rich Gold matrix.” As you
transition from one into the other, you generate and spend currency in
the form of intellectual energy, or CreATP. Science produces knowledge
that is used by engineers. Engineering produces utility that is used by
designers. Designers produce changes in behavior that are perceived by
artists. Art produces new perceptions of the world, thereby granting
access to new information in and about it, and inspiring new scientific
inquiry. As in the cumulative Aramaic song, Chad Gadya, there is
repetition, continuity and change. Some content is generated, other
content is consumed, some is released and new content is formed.

The Clock, the Microscope, the Compass and the Gyroscope
========================================================

As a speculative map, the KCC is intentionally abstract. In hopes of
eliciting debate and revision, its many meanings can be read through a
multiplicity of lenses.

KCC as Clock
------------

The KCC can be read as a clock like the Krebs Cycle itself. But unlike
the Krebs Cycle, the CreATP pathway is bidirectional. In this clock,
direction can be reversed. Time can also stand still (by remaining in
the same location on the circle), it can ‘bend’ (by introducing
geometrical changes, e.g. from a circle to an ellipse), or it can be
foreshortened (by introducing topological changes, e.g. from a circle to
a figure eight or a spiral). Furthermore, if you generate excess energy,
you can skip domains—from Science to Design, bypassing Engineering—and
thereby ‘time travel.’ We get boosts of CreATP for free when we are good
at what we do, when we excel in integration. Good Design, for example,
is good exploration: it questions certain belief systems—physical and
immaterial—about the world. Then it releases some embodiments of these
speculations into the world, contributing to the build-up of what we
know as culture. If done well, good Design can establish new basic
Science without going through Art. By example, Buckminster Fuller’s
geodesic domes (“buckyballs”) helped scientists visualize the molecule
with the formula C60, whose related class of molecules were named
“fullerenes.”

KCC as Microscope
-----------------

The KCC, in its current form, does not yet express transitions in
physical scale. But, of course, you can consider the four domains as
four objective lenses of an imaginary microscope through which to view,
and act upon, the world. The way we view our environment, and interact
within it, is ultimately dependent on the lens through which we choose
to see it. Choosing is no innocent act. A material scientist will
generally explore the physical composition of matter through the lens of
properties. A biologist, however, looks at the world not through the
lens of properties, but rather through the lens of function. Both live
in the same reality, but experience it altogether differently, and
therefore act upon it in a singular way. If they could see both views
simultaneously, they would link properties and behaviors.

KCC as Compass
--------------

The KCC can be read as a compass rose, north-to-south and east-to-west.
The north-to-south axis leads from sky to earth: from ‘information’
produced by Science and Art in the hemisphere of ‘perception,’ to
‘utility’ produced by Design and Engineering in the hemisphere of
‘production.’ The farther north, the more theoretical (or philosophical)
the regime. The farther south, the more applied (or economic) the
regime. The north marks the climax of human exploration into the
unknown. The south marks the products and outcomes associated with new
creative solutions and deployments based on exploration. The
east-to-west axis leads from nature to culture: from ‘knowledge’
produced by Science and Engineering in the hemisphere of ‘nature,’ to
‘behaviors’ produced by Art and Design in the hemisphere of ‘culture.’
Along this axis, one travels from understanding—describing and
predicting phenomena within the physical world—to creating new ways of
using and experiencing it.

KCC as Gyroscope
----------------

Most provocatively, the KCC can be understood as a plan-projection of a
gyroscope, measuring or maintaining creative orientation. This analogy
imagines a three-dimensional globe transcending ‘flatland,’ where at the
very top(s)—the poles of the diagram—all modalities collide into one,
big nebula. A Big Bang where all of this actually begins. Complete
entanglement.

Holes and Hacks
===============

As with any speculative proposition, particularly when expressed
graphically, there are many intellectual holes and cracks.

From Art to Science: a Cinderella Moment
----------------------------------------

Some claim—and even tittle-tattle the point—that the passage from Art to
Science is far-fetched at best, and forced at worst. After all, Picasso
and Einstein didn’t know each other (the myth of an impromptu meeting in
1904 at Montmartre’s Le Lapin Agile aside). But does it matter? Both
questioned the relationship between space and time, arriving at
expressions speculating on their relationship in deep and meaningful
ways. Both were archetypes of Modernism, co-existing in an age that
questioned the culture of nature…and the nature of culture. Granted, my
determination to posit the completed circle—to assert the continuity of
the KCC—may be seen as naïve, or even sophomoric. Please assume the
former, and suspend disbelief. After all, only through faith (will) we
leap. That is to say: the ability to create sufficient leverage to leap
from Art to Science is the ultimate force multiplier. It’s where
potential energy is converted to kinetic energy, a posse ad esse.

Culture is Nature is Culture
----------------------------

The nature-culture divide is every anthropologist’s bread-and-butter.
And the question whether these two entities can be perceived, expressed
and acted upon in coalescence carries tension in the KCC’s extrapolated
poles. If “nature” is described as “anything that supports life,” and if
life “cannot be sustained without culture,”<span class="footnote"
node-type="footnote"
value="The Dawn of the Entanglement. Is the Internet Changing the Way You Think?: The Net’s Impact on Our Minds and Future (Edge Question Series)."
date-structured-value="" count="5">5</span> the two belief systems
collapse into singularity. In this singularity, Nature claims the
infrastructure of civilization and, equally so, culture now enables the
design of Nature herself.

Global Citizenship at the Cost of Intellectual Vernacular
---------------------------------------------------------

Is intellectual flexibility more worthy than it is profitable? Is global
intellectual citizenship a road to perdition? Might simultaneously
inhabiting all four domains, or all the silos of enlightenment, entail a
loss in disciplinary expertise and research proficiency? Perhaps. Still,
you can’t have one without the other: central (disciplinary) vision will
get you far, but peripheral (antidisciplinary) vision will get you
farther. So while the ability to occupy all four domains simultaneously
requires the kind of expertise that sacrifices expertise, it is a sine
qua non for a worthy spin.

Antonelli gets ‘Knotty’
=======================

A mathematical knot is not what you think. It is not the kind of knot
you would use to yoke your shoes or tie a tie. In knot theory, knots are
closed loops: they have no ends at which they can be unknotted. It is
this very concept that inspired Paola Antonelli to coin the term “Knotty
Objects.”

So what is a Knotty Object?

One can perceive the world as a singularity, i.e., top down through the
lens of a particular profession or plot on the “Rich Gold matrix.” But
one can also view the world bottom up, object first. Knotty objects are
bigger than the sum of their parts. Viewing them fuses multiple
perspectives, thereby generating an expanded, more profound, vision of
the world. Knotty objects are so knotty that one can no longer
disentangle the disciplines or the disciplinary knowledge that
contributed to their creation. If in the Age of Entanglement, we
understand objects from a manifold of vantages, Knotty Objects force
awareness of their condition through a multivalent approach.

During the Knotty Objects summit at the MIT Media Lab (July 2015), Paola
Antonelli, Kevin Slavin and I focused on four knotty
objects-as-archetypes: a phone, a brick, a bitcoin and a steak. Each
posed a particular context for their knotting: communication, the built
environment, commerce and gastronomy. But each also begged to be
explored through many realms.

Take the steak for example. Its ‘design’—whether it is prepared using
the animal as source, or is produced from scratch in a lab—embodies a
difficult assortment of technical skill and moral contradiction. While
bullfighting beef is ironically considered the most ecological meat in
the world, its synthetic equivalent is just as ethically troubling:
engineering in vitro meat requires market-driven environmental
sacrifices that are just as Homeric as the killing of a sacred bull.
Whichever way you look at it, there is no escaping guilt. In this knotty
universe, we are still cavemen, controlled by our pre-established moral
code and views.

The creation of knotty objects is just as knotty. In fact, the
techniques to create them, as well as their ultimate physical
expression, are intellectual mirror images of each other: the process
reflects the knottiness of their related products. Bluntly, a knotty
creator must simultaneously occupy all four domains of the KCC, and
bring together insights that are as profoundly scientific as they are
artistically insightful.

What is so special about these objects is that their creation—their
science, their engineering, their design and their projected location in
culture—is not a discrete process; it is nonlinear and cannot be
unknotted. When it is considered successful, a knotty object has the
power not only to question the way we live, but also to change material
practice, to question manufacturing protocols and to completely redefine
social constructs. This is a very exciting time for creators of the
built environment, a time when the disciplines are knotted within
contexts that are at once technologically savvy and culturally
sensitive. The knot then becomes the ultimate form of entanglement.

Knotty Objects are antidisciplinary. Q.E.D.

Ito’s Pangea
============

Since the Age of Enlightenment, the realms of human exploration and
expression have been coddled into silos that are self-reliant and often
self-referential, both in means and in mindset. But if you can smash
protons down a seventeen-mile straw at nearly the speed of light, you’ve
earned the right to question the category of gravity. Theoretical
physics alone just isn’t enough: it’s an entangled proposition to a
truly BIG question, spawned by an entangled state (literally and
metaphorically).

“Quantum entanglement” denotes the moment a few or more particles
interrelate such that the quantum state of any particle cannot be
described alone, only all the particles en masse. If Enlightenment was
the salad, Entanglement is the soup. In the Age of Entanglement it
becomes impossible to discern one ingredient from another. Taxonomies
are defunct; disciplinary walls dissolve. At the extrapolated summit of
the KCC as Gyroscope, all silos coalesce (back) into the Pangea of
information.

Due to the boon of new fabrication technologies, the scales of synthesis
are approaching the already micro scales of analysis, and ‘writing’ the
world is thereby becoming as granular as ‘reading’ it. Consider for
example the transition of information from an MRI scan to a 3D print in
the production of a prosthetic limb with graded properties that match
and respond to a particular person’s physiology. Or a wearable
micro-biome, designed at a scale that can filter your gut. Just like the
cave painters, it is through creative expression that we can re-enter
(or re-read) the same view from a different perspective. Communication
protocols between and across such perspectives become explicit because,
as in the Krebs Cycle, synthesis and degradation are interchangeable.
The instant when units of work and units of perception coalesce becomes
a thrilling creative moment<span class="footnote" node-type="footnote"
value="The Dawn of the Entanglement. Is the Internet Changing the Way You Think?: The Net’s Impact on Our Minds and Future (Edge Question Series)."
date-structured-value="" count="6">6</span> for the free souls and the
free soloists in the Age of Entanglement.

The MIT Media Lab — ‘Ito’s Pangea,’ or the ‘Negroponte supercontinent’ —
can entangle precisely because it makes the stuff that makes the KCC
spin: media. And I don’t mean news, or electronics, or digital media,
not even social media. But that which possesses one world: “each hath
one, and is one.”

Acknowledgements
================

The phrase “Age of Entanglement” is attributed to my good friend and
colleague Danny Hillis, who has explored similar phrasing in.<span
class="footnote" node-type="footnote"
value="Thinking in Indian. A John Mohawk Reader."
date-structured-value="" count="7">7</span>

Footnotes
=========

1.  <span id="fn-1"><span class="pub-note-content-component">Developing
    Musical Intuitions: A Project-Based Introduction to Making and
    Understanding Music.</span>
    <a href="#fn-1-return" class="return-link">↩︎</a></span>
2.  <span id="fn-2"><span class="pub-note-content-component">The Age of
    Digital Entanglement. Scientific American. 303, 93.</span>
    <a href="#fn-2-return" class="return-link">↩︎</a></span>
3.  <span id="fn-3"><span class="pub-note-content-component">The Age of
    Digital Entanglement. Scientific American. 303, 93.</span>
    <a href="#fn-3-return" class="return-link">↩︎</a></span>
4.  <span id="fn-4"><span class="pub-note-content-component">The Art
    Instinct: Beauty, Pleasure, and Human Evolution.</span>
    <a href="#fn-4-return" class="return-link">↩︎</a></span>
5.  <span id="fn-5"><span class="pub-note-content-component">The Dawn of
    the Entanglement. Is the Internet Changing the Way You Think?: The
    Net’s Impact on Our Minds and Future (Edge Question Series).</span>
    <a href="#fn-5-return" class="return-link">↩︎</a></span>
6.  <span id="fn-6"><span class="pub-note-content-component">The Dawn of
    the Entanglement. Is the Internet Changing the Way You Think?: The
    Net’s Impact on Our Minds and Future (Edge Question Series).</span>
    <a href="#fn-6-return" class="return-link">↩︎</a></span>
7.  <span id="fn-7"><span class="pub-note-content-component">Thinking in
    Indian. A John Mohawk Reader.</span>
    <a href="#fn-7-return" class="return-link">↩︎</a></span>
